This python notebook was created as part of my CSAI bachelor thesis with the title "Exploring SVMs for State-of-the-Art MRI Brain Tumor Classification: Image Enhancement and Transformation Approaches"
Experiment is reproducable with code in notebook and dataset utilised from open kaggle dataset by Masoud Nickparvar https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/masoudnickparvar/brain-tumor-mri-dataset

Abstract of thesis:
Brain cancer is one of the most dangerous types of cancer in the world. It causes significant challenges due to their potential life-threatening impact on the brain's functions. Depending on the level of cancer, early and accurate diagnosis can facilitate timely interventions and enhance treatment success rates. However, Neurosurgeons face challenges in detecting brain tumors due to the lack of a standardized approach and having to check thousands of scans. Researchers have strived to develop automated brain tumor detection models using image processing, machine learning (ML), and deep learning (DL) algorithms. However, the deployment of complex convolutional neural networks (CNNs) might put a strain on hospitals due the high cost and substantial energy consumption associated with robust server infrastructure, posing challenges for resource-limited healthcare settings. To address this, we explore the application of low-complexity models specifically the SVM model integrated with image enhancements and transformations to improve diagnostic accuracy while minimizing resource demands. Although these models may not match the performance of multi-layered CNNs, they offer sufficiently accurate results, potentially enhancing access to advanced diagnostic tools and fostering sustainability in healthcare infrastructure. The Dataset utilised is an open Kaggle dataset of brain MRI images and sampled at equal class sizes. It was shuffled randomly for 80\% training, 10\% validation, and 10\% testing. A set of optimal hyperparameters were identified and applied the various image enhancement filters to the SVM. Results show that across 10 iterations the CLAHE filter improved the SVM the most reaching the precision of 0.848, recall of 0.846 and F1-score of 0.846.
